I would consider you both to be, in my opinion, kind of real Newport kind
of Newport heads really. Is that fair comment do you think? Yeah. You're both very visible,
both very proactive, people are very positive. I think you've done, you've both done huge amounts
for Newport, actually I really do. I'm not here to brown-nose you, but I think you both have kind of
done exactly what Newport needs, kind of, you've been a hugely positive influence. So I'm just
going to ask you first, when did we get City Stations? I can't remember. I think it was just
from doing a bit of prep for this, it was 2002 I think, I didn't make a note of it but... I was
going to say it was either 2001 or 2002 because my daughter was five because it was when the
Jubilee happened and my mum dressed her up in uni and jacks and took her to see the queen and I was
fucking fuming. What did it mean? Did it mean anything? What did Newport's kind of,
well it might have been able to City Stations to have any effect on you? Funnily enough, when I was
sort of doing a bit of prep for this and reading back, because I had this horrible feeling I just
wasn't going to be able to remember anything because I spent certainly most of the noughties
in the second half of the 90s with a beer in my hand and I thought well I know that it was the
most exciting time of my life and it sort of made me who I am and I made the most amazing
friends and had great experiences and I don't mean like in an alcoholic, like blackout kind of way,
I just mean like it was all just such, you know, like it was like 15 years there or longer that
was just kind of felt like one long night out. That's a good way of putting it. It's just sort
of very difficult to sort of put things in order. So I was having a bit of a look, you know,
googling a little bit to get the chronology and remember what happened when because some things
that I thought had happened in 2005 happened in 1997 or whatever and so it was interesting.
But the one thing that did come up was the City Status thing and I remember it quite well because
I remember, even though I've always felt sort of, you know, in the mixed, in the middle of
the Newport experience or whatever you want to call it, I've also felt as a writer, I've also
felt very much sort of standing on the periphery of it, you know, sort of observing and almost
kind of like gathering material as my life has sort of gone on really for, you know, whenever that
might prove useful. So I don't think there's any other place in the UK really that would have been
so, you know, sort of ambivalent about it really. I mean it felt like something everybody was talking
about and it felt like there was kind of an interesting balance between, often happening
within the same sentence uttered by the same person, but this kind of like, well it's about time
and why do we care? Like why do we want this? What difference is this going to make? And there is
kind of, I know this isn't particular to Newport, but there is certainly an attitude to
of Newportonians that, you know, nobody else can criticise our place, but we're very sort of
proudly down on it ourselves. Almost like we understand it's a shithole, but we understand
the kind of the light that shines from that, you know what I mean? It's like everybody's kind of-
It's got a good image actually, the light that shines.
The light, that could, that should be the city logo, get rid of the cherub,
just like a turd with light shining out of it.
You know, I do specifically remember the city status thing, really kind of encapsulating that
attitude of the Newportonian, if you like, that it was kind of like, well of course we should be a
city. How dare Cardiff, Swansea and, you know, Wrexham be cities and Newport not be, that's
ridiculous, but at the same time it's stupid that we're a city. Like how on earth do we- I mean,
I suppose that this was before, you know, St Asaph and St David's, you know, and like one man and
his dog in a field, and if they were waving a flag the right way they became, were given city status.
So it was more sort of, there were certain people who'd been waiting a long time for Newport to
become a city, but when it became a city nobody could see exactly what the benefits were.
No, were you aware of that, certainly when I was a teenager, a long time ago, were you aware of a
kind of a myth or urban myth that Newport would never get city status because of the Chardist
riots? I remember that. I was more aware of the narrative that Newport would never get city status
because that meant if you were a businessman coming from London it would be the first city you hit
when you came to Wales, and Cardiff would never allow that to happen. I mean, as you get older you
realize that almost everything you hear is a conspiracy theory. You know, as you get a bit
older you realize that most of the people in charge of things are so completely inept and out of their
depth that the very idea that a conspiracy on any level could take place is laughable. But when
you're young you kind of think, yeah, the grey suits man, you know, and especially in a place like
Newport which is very, Newport to me was always a place that was about sticking your
fingers up to authority. That's what Newport was. I mean, perhaps we'll come on to talk about it
later, but one of the things like being editor of Wales Arts Review has done for me in the last 10
years is it's kind of introduced me to Wales. I didn't grow up having any kind of anything that
would resemble a Welsh identity. I was from Newport and that was that. I think that's really an
important point and one that kind of chimes with me. Sam, being a Newport girl, were you born in
Newport? No, I'm from Birmingham. Look at that. I moved to Newport when I was 13, so I've been here
for 32 years, so I'm pretty Newport now, yeah. Honorary Newportonian? Yeah, no, Birmingham I
grew up in. My parents lived in Caleon when I was three until I was seven and then back to Birmingham
and then back to Newport. So I've been here like 95 percent of my life. Do you identify as Welsh or
English or both? Oh, 100 percent Welsh, 100 percent Welsh. It's interesting actually, I wasn't sure
whether I'd be Welsh or English until Wales qualified for the Euros and played England
and then I just wanted them to absolutely stuff the English and I was like oh crap I must be Welsh
because I genuinely had never really given it much thought until that match and then I was like stuff
them. So yeah. What Gary said, do you identify with any of that? The township to city, state,
does that mean anything to you? The main thing I identify with what Gary said is that living in
Newport you don't have a Welsh identity. Working for Music Venue Trust for the last two years
and the way that the profile of the pub has grown over the last five years, I've been going up to
Wrexham to Focus Wales and you know over to other places to do to talk on behalf of Music Venue
Trust and things. I suddenly have this massive like view of how much of a Welsh identity everywhere
else has that Newport is really really lacking. Like I just spent six days up in Wrexham a couple
of weeks ago for Focus Wales and everything they do is about being Welsh and it's about being in
North Wales and it's about bringing you know bringing acts from Canada. They're so proud that
they're bringing these Canadians in to to North Wales and you just don't get that in Newport.
There's no Welsh pride in our city and I don't know why. Well I think there's probably more
than there was than when I was younger. It's definitely on the rise, definitely.
How old are you in 1993 Sam if you don't mind me asking? I was 17. Okay that's a good age because
that's when I think the Welsh Language Act was passed and I just wondered if because I was
knocking around then and a lot of people were nose was put out of joint by having all these
bilingual signs suddenly spreading up everywhere. It sounds ridiculous now it's quite obvious they
should be there but do you remember that? I got a Gary first actually. Yeah well I mean I was 14 in
1993 so I missed out on compulsory Welsh in school by one year and I remember not just me but all of
my friends being you know I think we might have even thrown a party specifically to celebrate the
fact we didn't have to learn compulsory Welsh and of course now I sort of not regret it because it
was beyond my control anyway but I feel a bit sad that I wasn't given the opportunity to learn
or wasn't forced to learn Welsh. There's a lot of things in school that you would have hated at the
time that when you get older I think you think oh god I wish they'd made me do that. I wish they
really forced grammar down my throat so when I hand in a manuscript for a book I'm not getting
loads of red marks back going you know I've got all these in the wrong place or that is not where
a semicolon goes. So yeah I suppose you have you know sort of different perspective when you look
back on things. I have a sort of strange relationship with the Welsh language in that like my
one half of my family comes from Welsh speaking Wales I mean my father was from Newport but my
grandfather was from Kidwelly and I remember him he'd be up when I was very young he'd be on the
phone talking to his sister in Welsh and things like that and so that was kind of my introduction
to Welsh was actually through this kind of like mythic like ancestral line that fed through and
then stopped at my dad who was you know always Newport through and through and then it kind of
came back but came back in a kind of bureaucratic way it came down from above rather than up through
the soil do you know what I mean like with my with my granddad it was an organic real thing that
attached me to a culture I knew that I had an attachment to but didn't understand and then by
the time it comes to in school and you just you know the less all I want to do is you know listen
to Bob Dylan I didn't I have no interest in Mike Stevens you know I mean that was like insane
then and it felt like it was coming down rather than it was an absolutely interesting point I
completely agree Welsh culture is something you have to go in search of if you come from Newport
it's not something that's fed you really how about you Sam you you say you identify as Welsh
now completely even though you were born in England yeah so that's interesting because even
though I am Welsh my father's Welsh my mother Scottish but was born in Wales I I've never really
you know cared that much to be honest about being Welsh didn't really mean it probably means more to
me than it ever has I remember when the Manics first came out how that kind of they were almost
anti-Welsh in a way and I kind of understood that you know in the late 80s because if you were from
Wales especially if you're in like because my being in bands my background you know there were no
there was no bands from who were cool from Wales in the in the 80s really or very few and you know
it was almost a cross you had to bear to be Welsh you know people would just assume that you were
shit if you were in a group you know anyway but enough of me so so again so what's your relationship
like with the Welsh language or just with your Welsh identity this would be interesting be in
English I actually took up Welsh on Duolingo during lockdown not getting that far not doing
that well but I'm determined to keep it going but yeah Dwynduski Cymraeg so yeah I am learning
very very slowly it's it's a very difficult language but it's so beautiful and I gave
evidence to a select committee in the senate back about three years ago about grassroots music in
Wales and I was the only person there who needed the translation headphones and that really bothered
me because this is my country and it is the music scene that I've spent 30 years working in and I
want to be able to talk about it in the language of the country you know I don't want to have to
be the only person there with the translation headphones on it was it was a real eye-opener
to how much I'd missed by not as Gary said by not being forced to do Welsh in school because I was
in school in Wales at the same time but obviously I was three years away from compulsory Welsh
and I do feel like I'm which school were you in I went to quite a few schools because my parents
moved a lot so I went to Westmarn in Pontypool and I went to Fairwater in Cwmbran and I went to
Closaciliog in Cwmbran. Wow that's good okay well you're talking about my manner there yeah.
Yeah so yeah and I think in terms of Welsh identity one of the things that's driven it
at the moment is the difference between Welsh identity and British identity because there's
an artist I'm a little bit obsessed with at the moment a black punk artist called Bob Villain
and one of the things he does is Bob Villain did you say? Bob Villain.
One of the things he does is he pisses on a Union Jack because he absolutely despises you know the
English government and the English system and when he played in Wrexham a few weeks ago I had
to say to him do not do that to the Welsh flag I said if you've got a Union Jack with you do it
but you cannot get away with that in Wales the people in Wales will not appreciate you pissing
on their dragon you know and I had to and I think that's a big indicator of how different the culture
of England and Wales is is that in Wales if you piss on our flag someone's going to beat the shit
out of you. I say interesting actually it's not the English flag it's the English flag is the St.
George's Cross you know it's the Unionist flag Union flag yeah but you have I don't even know
how long but for years 20 years at least probably more you've been a real kind of face and a real
positive role model and driver of live music in Newport you know and South Wales really do you
ever put Welsh bands on? All the time yeah we're doing I'm not going to try and say it in Welsh but
it's Welsh Music Day in January and we're organising an entire week of Welsh language bands
in the pub because that's really important there's a Welsh language band from Cardiff called Chroma
and they are phenomenal and you know it's just there's so much amazing Welsh language music out
there at the moment it's really really coming through like back in the 90s when you know when
Gorkies came through and there was this oh god is Welsh language actually going to break through
into the mainstream thing I think that might finally happen now. Well okay maybe I'm not the
opinion actually that the language of rock and roll is not English it's actually American you know
if you listen to it's kind of it's kind of the American we're dealing with really rather than
English. Yeah you've got bands like you've got bands like Adwaith coming out of West Wales who
are phenomenal and just things like that and there are some really incredible like Welsh language
artists out there at the moment. I want to talk a bit more about Newport though I'm going to
nap you guys on music as well but I wanted to just try to talk about a few things anything you
can think of I put the Newport for some reason we got the Newport ship discovery here is anybody
interested in that or is that Gary I've got a feeling you might be interested in the Newport ship.
Well maybe not quite as interested as you might think but I think the Newport ship debacle is
that what it is going to be called is it still in a shed somewhere like in a tank of water.
Yeah isn't the basement of the riverfront the shape that it is because the ship was supposed
to go there something and then somebody realized that actually no it will just rot if we can't keep
it wet yeah it was it was something like that the entire of the riverfront theater has a ridiculous
basement it's huge have you been there yeah it's massive yeah we did we did a crazy golf project
for them where we built crazy golf out of trash and they let us build down there because no one
uses it for anything else and it's huge the word Gary used is perfect it's a debacle to pull a
perfect specimen of a medieval ship out of the river while you're building a theater and then
custom build a completely inappropriate space for that ship it's just so Newport it's so Newport
it seems to me that the whole thing around the ship at the time and consequently is something
that again you know is speaks almost like microcosmically of what where Newport stands
and what it is because I think I should have looked this up I can't remember the precise
details but there are worse examples of this type of medieval ship medieval boat you know
merchant vessel in other areas of the UK and they they are like prized possessions in that
area there's one in Bristol I believe or at least along that coast I did a thing for radio three
and one of the other people who are on this like arts round table discussion was a professor from
Bristol who was there to talk about the medieval ship that he'd been sort of working on looking
after and curating and and he was like well it's really interesting because obviously you know you're
from Newport this is off air you're from Newport that's really interesting because you've actually
got much better medieval ship than we've gotten it's isn't it just sat in a in a shed somewhere
in a tub of water and and you you just you know you just wonder maybe it's a bit of a
Welsh thing I don't know that I have you know a lot of opinions about how the Welsh establishment
for want of a better term regards its own art and culture I don't think there's enough people who
feel free to talk about that I mean this is your chance to
feel like you've got your own show well oh I've got plenty of chances to talk about this
um I just think there's um they they they are too many people in decision-making offices um who you
know aren't interested in reading books or listening to music or going to the theatre I mean ironically
I mean I you know I probably should say from the off I don't live in Newport anymore I haven't
been for four years but um uh I would say that Jane Bryant who's the assembly member for Newport
Westroyd lived for you know nearly 35 years 40 years um is one of the most like interesting
cultured people I knew Jane before she became an am and she's a massive reader she's a massive
music fan and and hopefully she will work her way through the ranks and become you know more
influential as the years go by she's only been an am for you know the last the election but last
the one before um I think she already is she's put a stamp all over the Lady Ronda campaign and
that is now gathering some serious momentum you know things like so it's yeah yeah sorry it's
getting better yeah I didn't even suggest she didn't uh didn't have any you know sway but like
as it goes on I'd expect her to become a cabinet member and then who knows what you know in the
next decade or whatever um and and I think she'd bring that cultured uh idea of what being in an
office like hers um should be and you know um politics could do with more cultured people you
know absolutely if if the if the people you want to the people you want to see in politics are not
just like people who are passionate about all those things that are important social change and
you want people who you know read books for fun yeah you know people who people who have a record
collection you know people who go to gigs people who you know who are interested in the theater
people who you know you can sit in a pub and talk about whatever with you know not just somebody who
has a load of bullet points and they they they know how to operate in the political sphere which
is how you become successful in politics mostly nowadays tell us just about your first gigs you
went to you know things you the gigs you remember in newport first gig i went to was neds atomic
dustbin in newport center and i absolutely loved it i thought it was the greatest thing that i'd
ever been to in my life and then i tried to go to a gig in lapub but i was 16 so i got thrown out
and then i had to wait until i was 18 to go back because kieran had clocked me and knew exactly who
i was and what i looked like so i spent all my time in tj's at gigs instead because
funny story john siccolo knew my family when we were living in chilean when i was three
and the first time i went into tj's at 13 maybe my 14th birthday i think he clocked me
clocked who my parents were but also thought i was my sister who was 10 years older than me so for
the first five years i was at gigs and tj's john would call me manda and he'd always say how's the
baby meaning me and i'd say things like yeah she's great she's doing the gcse's this year
and he'd be like oh send her my love and then i turned up on my 18th and he just whacked me
around the head in typical john fashion you are the fucking baby you bastard and i was like yeah
sorry john so yeah that was just a lot of time in tj's really how do you remember that place though
because it's such it's such a lot of people you know so many everyone's got their own story and
memories tj's it kind of looms large in the new book legend but each story is kind of personal
and you were a regular right yeah i was four or five nights a week for about 10 years i think
because i once i got a job in lapar that was when simon was putting on gigs and the headline band
wouldn't go on till half 11 so i would close the bar at 10 to 11 fly through clean down and be in
tj's by 25 past 11 to watch the most incredible bands after my shift you know and then on the
weekends i'd go over drinking so you you but you kind of went from being a just a music fan
and a barmaid right i guess to running the shit you know running the show and booking the band
and so tell us a bit about that if i remember if i remember you did you put on british c-pads
yeah i did yeah they became such an important band and they've still gone actually they've
changed their name they dropped british haven't they yeah they're now called c-power because
they don't want to be associated with you know any kind of uh toxicity around them
they didn't want bob villan pissing on any of their album covers
for me the main thing was when i took over the pub as manager it blew my mind that the venue was
sat there empty and we only did local bands on a thursday and yet we had this incredible 100
capacity venue because while tj's is was amazing it was also too big for local bands and smaller
touring bands to feel like they'd make you know they could ever fill it so a lot of them would
just skip newport by and go somewhere else that had a smaller venue so like the first thing i did
was why are we doing gigs seven days a week you know we've got a pa we've got a stage why why are
we only opening this room on thursdays for one local band and then fridays and saturdays for
discos why are we doing gigs seven nights a week so i reached out to some mates who were putting on
gigs in cardiff and offered a free venue hire and then that was it then the pub's been a staple of
the touring circuit actually you know i used to go there i actually think it's a much better venue
now the shape of it you know but you agree i love it yeah i love the new venue absolutely love it
somebody came in a few weeks ago and said it was the old one was better and i was like well
no it wasn't you're wrong like i'm sure nostalgically yeah because you were younger
and you had some of your best times there but in terms of accessibility and everything else the
new one is so much better and the people that are having the time of their life there now are having
it in much better venue yeah no one's going to fall down the stairs and break their necks
no one's going to have to tell their disabled friend they can't come in right because of the
stairs you know it's it's just a much better venue for loads of reasons mainly the lack of the bloody
stairs gary similar sort of question really i mean yeah you're not smith's gig by any chance were
you i don't know if you were no no the smith's gig would have been uh before my time i mean the
two gigs um when was the smith's gig 86 yeah yeah something like that it's when he got pulled off
the stage you know he got pulled off the i mean we all knew the story and and i don't know if you
remember that he came back to newport i was reading the as doing prep for this but morris
he came back he played newport when he was supporting bowie in 95 they played newport center
that was the the famous tour that morris he quit the tour halfway through and the quote was
the quote was that i'll never forget for morris he was um which is just such a brilliant hilarious
quote coming for out of morris's mouth was that when i signed up to do the tour i didn't realize
that we would have to spend the entire time worshiping at the temple of david okay so what
newport music experiences do you remember so going back before the decade that we
sort of talking about i mean the interesting thing for me is how clearly i remember my first gig in
newport and the reason was was because i was about 13 and i went with my dad my dad got me tickets to
see huey louis and the news in newport center and it was the second gig i'd ever been to because the
first gig he ever took them to was not long before that we went to see paul mccartney and
ills court and that was my first ever live musical experience but um but huey louis and the news it
was you know i think i went through a period probably for a while of like being slightly
well i'm not going to tell my mates about that you know probably through the 90s i never mentioned
that was my one of my early early musical experience but like looking back at it i
remember it really well because i was young so obviously i hadn't been drinking because i was
a my old man and stuff but um uh and i was like 13 so i probably wasn't drinking by that point
anyway but um uh just that it was an absolutely fantastic gig i mean for a start i was 13 and i
was watching essentially what was to me the you know a live version of the back to the future
soundtrack now what like 13 year old boy wouldn't think that was the greatest night night of their
life but also i remember really clearly that they did um a like 50s acapella set in the middle
where the band put all their instruments down and walked to the front of the stage and did like four
or five songs as an acapella set and it was and it was even at sort of my young uh fresh age at
that point i remember thinking just what an amazing thing that was but then you know going on from
there i mean i've been going through the gigs that i missed more than anything the gigs that i that
i've got a bit of a history of missing great gigs missing faithless at v3 which i think was the
i was i was i was abroad at the time i was there was a hilarious story about that gig so faithless
played v3 and max jazz left a huge bag of weed and a bible in the dressing room and laurence who owned
v3 mailed the book back with a message that said enjoy your weed not so much your book and that
was that was that was his message that he sent back that was a great gig that was that was a
really great gig yeah that was a famously great gig in the in the world's probably the world's
weirdest short-lived club of v3 which i yeah i i almost completely forgotten about my experiences
of v3 and the 65 foot dragon that made its staircase um that's about that that sounds
interesting i don't even know about it well it was it was a club that the the guy um laurence howells
who owned the cotton club in the 90s he owned the cotton club and um part of rumors which was um
which is now the pub which is now the pub it is indeed um i worked in v3 for a long time yeah you
did not you got it was out was yeah it was only open for 15 months and i think i worked in it for
all of them it was a very very strange place really strange you could fill an hour with stories of v3
quite yeah you really i painted v3 before it opened i was like god what was i doing i was i was
i spent my teens and 20s like doing temp jobs and just earning beer tokens really to hang it in new
port that was my life i mean there's just there's no slander here because laurence ended up in
prison for drug offenses oh yeah he was insane but i was trying to run the bar the one saturday and
we had no alcohol nothing and i said we can't open he said we can we charge him a tenner to get in
then we sell him the drugs in the cloakroom and i was like i don't want to know about that i need
to run the bar so he borrowed like a thousand pound off some mates and went off to the cash
and carry and he came back with a 12 foot lava lamp for the vip area and i was like where's the
booze and he was like oh how cool is this and i was like literally i have nothing on the bar
like this the man was completely insane yeah absolutely insane yeah he was he was i don't
think i know him wait what's v3 remind me where it is it was argos on stow hill for a while
okay um offices now i mean newport has always been to my mind anyway quite druggy you know
a lot of drugs in newport well i always used to blow my mind that everybody knew you could buy
drugs in the cloakroom in v3 and the guy that was in the cloakroom was always off his tits but you
always got your coat back as well it's amazing he did actually look after your coat as well
yeah you could get your coat as well as your drugs conscientious yeah saturday nights were called
enigma weren't they the dj nights were called oh yeah that was well yeah and he used to make us
turn up for work 15 minutes early take our shoes off and stand on the dance floor while he played
enigma the wailing monk song and we'd all just been looking at each other like what the
fuck is this guy doing i just want to earn my money and go home it was absolutely bonkers
absolutely insane it was a really strange place it was very very new book because he also booked
terror vision when they were at the absolute pits of their career yeah and we'd sold about 15 tickets
and then they released tequila yeah that's right and overnight i think we went from 15 tickets to
800 tickets the gig was like a week later and we had no bar staff no door staff because we'd sold
no tickets so we were scrabbling like nutters yeah i do remember that pretty sure he paid them
100 pounds and then they got to number one the week of the gig and then they released tequila
three weeks over one then they played b3 and he made an absolute killing it is a place that's
kind of been forgotten in the the history of newport nightlife and yeah it was the place that had
that 65 foot dragon yep that but breathe smoke it was the smoke machine but actually yeah it was a
i think it was bigger than 65 foot gap was it it was it was essentially the on the staircase
well it went from so the tail was in the foyer yeah and then there was a foot at the back of the
room on the left hand side and then the whole thing curved around and then the head came over
the dance floor and then the other foot was at the other side of the room so the entire of the room
was just dragon when you press the smoke remote behind the dj the smoke would come out with the
dragon's mouth and his eyes would light up and it was incredible it must have cost so much money
met the artist because he came down and john the quiff was um obviously was doing nights at v3
and when the artist came down i met he was from west wales or something wasn't it from
yeah it was a phenomenal piece of artwork that was there's a wales online article not long
ago that josh natman wrote because i was chatting to josh in a pub and v3 came up and he went i need
to research this place and the dragon is now in somebody's garden in cardiff just in the garden
just chilling in the garden god they must have a big garden
i want to try and get some geography like where some place i start with gary actually because
you are you born and you bought gary yeah yeah yeah where are you from which part i was from
malpus originally but then um uh when i was about six or seven my parents moved up to
sort of the the the very edge of the ham post stroke gear and i went to um and then uh where
they still live actually yeah so i kind of went my dad my dad was a builder and he'd um uh yeah it
was kind of a big move my family had always my mother's from liverpool but my family had kind
of always lived in bettus malpus so where were your boyhood haunts where were your kind of uh
where did you like my boyhood haunts well um i mean boy my my parents house was is right by
saint willa cemetery which is i think it's like i think is my father was talking about this
recently i think is like the largest municipal cemetery in the uk or something i gotta think
for i love cemeteries actually oh well i mean it's still i mean my dad walks walks the dog
around there so i still go around there every now and again it is absolutely huge it takes two
hours to take the dog around the whole thing because i do it with mine it's a really good walk
that was my main horn that's playing in there i mean like that is weird yeah i mean it sounds
weirder than it was i think but my one of my best friends in school um in primary school and then
we went to the secondary school together um his father was the foreman so we could get away with
doing lots of things that you you know kids who just jumped over the fence couldn't do like we
could play football there for instance because because he'd go well play football down by here
because you're not going to be hitting any grave stones or you know they won't be able to see you
from the office and that kind of thing do you know what i mean but but we used to you know we
used to play football in the summer we used to play a bunch of us um school kids would play against
all the gravediggers down by the down by the um down with the mess room and uh you know these
were all like raggedy ass middle-aged men and they kicked lumps out of us and we had a whale of a time
but yeah so that was like when i was a kid when we started going out which was probably we were
probably like probably like 15 but really 16 i probably went to tj's like a mate it was a
right to passage really wasn't it yeah yeah t the things i remember earliest of tj's in the like
94 95 96 yes she is my best years i reckon the best year yeah probably yeah but i remember i
remember my best mate he really didn't like beer he hated lager something you know he sort of grew
out of but um so we used to go to go to tj's and he yeah i remember he went up to the bar and say
and asked for a vodka orange and they gave him vodka with like half a pint of orange cordial
and he just kind of drank it and was like this what a vodka and orange must be i suppose
just like half a pint of cordial with a shot of vodka in it but um and i think he drank that for
a few years before he realized that that's not what a vodka orange was you know one of the things
people i mean because i'm older than you guys generation or so i am i've said this to glenn's
that people people do tend to romanticize tj's actually um and that's fair enough because it
was a brilliant place and a certain time it really took off but actually in the late 80s and early
90s it could be very scary it could be a violent place you know i saw some i've seen some pretty
uh pretty small i saw a really horrific fight in there once at one point somebody got punched to
death in there that story has got an infamous tj story carried out and left to die on the street
you know um and the other thing that people kind of because it became a great rock and roll venue
but actually one of the reasons it became a venue was quite simply the fact that it was doing so
badly as a as a pub or a bar that that in the end john was almost forced to take in um you know
bands who couldn't get gigs anywhere else you know she was like we couldn't get a gig anyway
oh john can we play here you know uh matriarchal and at least he'll buy beer and that would and
it was kind of almost like a meeting of two desperate situations you know and then it kind
of evolved into this great great venue when when really Simon definitely and also connell duds
connell dubs didn't really the fair share connell duds really um because Simon would only put
american bands on you know then further once connell was kind of moved on to bigger things
you had johnny phillips and the sick future crew i think there's this massive tendency to romanticize
john and john was an amazing guy but he was not the person that bought the bands to newport
there was there was simon there was connell there was johnny phillips you know there was a lot of
people bringing bands to newport it was amazing that john gave them a space to do that that was
affordable and gave them a space where you could actually like put punk bands on without getting
thrown out he was a great character john though he gave the place a certain uh you know i i i do
think more credit needs to go out to the people that were bringing the bands to the the weird
little border town that wasn't cardiff or bristol i will mention them you know i mean connell duds
obviously he was famously was always his agent you know he brought them there and now he runs
i was at that gig i stood on a table and showed we'd bring back the 64 dolls because i thought
shit
i'm cut we're done that gig though sam i'll cut this bit out is i do simply remember it different
with me because i was at that show obviously because we played them yeah when i was hanging
out with oasis before yeah no no and because i didn't know they were i never you know i didn't
know them they weren't famous basically for two weeks later they were really famous but
that period they were i don't remember it being packed do you was it it was not packed there was
about 65 of us i would say and that is a generous estimate because i get so sick of everybody saying
they were there because you weren't i'm sorry i'm not i'm not like grabbing my own fucking call
points here you weren't there the other thing was a coach i remember two at least one coach if not
two but at least one coach from manchester show that with all their mates on it no i used to do
we used to do stuff like that is that if you play a gig at the town no one's going to come and see
you so you you take all your mates you know it's the only way you have an audience you probably do
it with the pub yeah i remember a coach coming down from manchester and i remember doing the gig
and i remember oasis going on but i just don't remember it being packed so it was not packed i
because i remember being you played and then me and remember my friend angie it was so quiet
and i remember being sat on the floor just in front of the stage smoking fags waiting for them
to come on there wasn't even a queue of people waiting for them to come on everyone else was at
the bar it was it was it was a really quiet gig i remember being sat on the floor on the floor
smoking a fag and thinking i wonder if these guys will be any good and then they came on and they
opened with cigarettes and alcohol which was the only single they've released so therefore they
played the only song i knew so they brought the shit out of me so i just left and decided to
harass them yeah so i thought i was misremembering step because everyone was telling me how packed it
was i was like no it was not i was um i was gonna say that um you know like the like like you said
earlier rich like the the peak years of tj's i think was sort of the mid 90s that was when everything
was coming together you had all those bands that went on to do great things playing there
and i think if you go into the you know a little bit later than that maybe but but the 90s i think
had that real kind of nightlife music ecosystem that was going on that fed into the noughties a
little bit but i think you know um i think you know the decade we were going to talk about the
noughties one of the things that when i was thinking about it earlier was the the noughties
even though a lot there was a lot of great stuff going on and there was you know good clubs and
it was you know le pub was was absolutely banging it was definitely um one of the best places to be
um uh in the you know in still is now but in the noughties you know it's just like there was so
much going on but i think also it was a time when that kind of newport nostalgia thing began and
look looking back on you know there was a lot going on about looking back on the 90s and i think
like i spent like 25 years sat at the bar in the merringer and you know that was you know that was
where where i was and the merringer shut at 11 obviously every night and that's when you'd go
to all the other places like le perbe or anywhere else that was that was my that was always my
journey and and the the thing rob jones who's still a landlady there who's like a bit of a
newport legend obviously um uh the thing about um that used to do rob's head in in the in the
noughties regularly was people coming in and saying where's your jukebox because they got rid
of the jukebox it was part of you know the brewery thing uh the sam smith brewery got rid of all
entertainment tvs and jukeboxes in the early noughties i think it was when they refurbed the
pub but the 90s you know the merringer jukebox was a was was like an iconic an iconic thing
but rob is a huge music head isn't he basically yeah yeah exactly you know he's a bit of an old
mardin you know he's um yeah massive massive music fan but but it was that jukebox in the merringer
that introduced me to loads of bands that i still hold really dearly today you know the idea of a
jukebox just being a place in the corner where you can put some music on to give some ambience to a
to a to a to a space to a pub is you know is one thing but what the the merringer jukebox was and
you know i'm not saying this was the only thing but it became kind of iconic particularly when
it was gone people would always be asking about what happened to the jukebox and uh when's the
jukebox coming back rob was the easiest way to wind robert behind the grab to get like you know
something thrown at a lemon thrown at your head or something that was definitely the easiest way
to get that done but it wasn't just about um it wasn't just they were great tunes on it it was
it was about the attitude of the pub but also it introduced me to loads of things like it introduced
me to political areas i i don't know at what point i would have got around to listening to the redskins
if it wasn't for hearing the redskins on the merringer jukebox when i was like 18 19 or whatever
i think it says a lot for newport as a town that had a rich musical history was that me and rob
from the merringer had a conversation about how terry calia was probably only on two jukeboxes
in the uk and they were both in newport because he was in the pub and the merringer and we were
like we were like we should we should research this because we can't imagine walking into a
pub anywhere else in britain finding terry calia on the jukebox and we don't i think that shows like
at that point newport had such a rich rich musical history that it was just represented
everywhere you went every pub you went in you know that something would be going on somewhere
i mean look at the riverfront even the riverfront was doing gigs back then which seems mental to me
now that they were actually doing original bands the buzzcocks played in the riverfront what the
hell is that about you know really really strange i i just think like if you wanted to encapsulate
like what you know my experience of growing up and growing on in newport from like mid-90s to
you know 20 years later was that everything everything went through the prism of music like
everything you talked about all your nights out um even for you know the couple of decades since
when the merringer is at no jukebox and had no music it's still the like number one topic of
conversation in any nook or cranny or at the bar it's still the pub that everybody goes to before the pub
but there's a gig at the pub everyone will go to the merringer for a beer before it's still that
place that music people just just gravitate to the thing about the noughties was that the jukebox
was gone and i think it kind of stands for something along the track of we were everybody
was kind of looking back on things even by then you know sort of 2004 2005 people were looking
back and thinking about you know how how great newport was in the 90s just like how everywhere
was busy there were loads of great bands coming through and i think also talking about that musical
element and the nightlife sorry the the musical nightlife was it was the noughties when bands
you know sort of mid-range bands and big bands not the sort of bands that would play
the pub but the the medium range and the big audience bands um stopped coming to newport like
newport center stopped you know as far as like you remember newport center was just to have
motorhead there every year and um maybe delimitri that would that's what newport center was there
for um whereas you know as we've talked about boi played there and you know uh the smiths and
the cure and um people just stopped booking those level those mid-range bands in newport they just
stopped booking them and neds atomic dustbin the cure the wonder stuff all played newport center
at some point exactly exactly and i and i think you know that was the noughties was the time when
people started looking back and maybe beginning to realize that those bands weren't coming to
newport anymore and i think there's a lot of reasons for those bands not coming to newport but
you know what one of them apparently i think one of the goldie looking chain told me this years ago
was that um uh promoters of those mid-range bands just didn't really want to come to wales anymore
because for some reason um in wales people buy the majority of people buy their tickets the night
before the gig and just no promoters wanted that kind of stress of like putting a band on and then
24 hours before the gig going we sold 50 tickets for like a 2000 seat with except the cure when
everyone from my college camped for three days for tickets three days in tents for tickets for the
cure i think when i think when those bands were playing you know when the cure were there in the
i think they were there in the late 90s they played a few times and they played the late 90s as well
when those bands were there you know they were still packing out you know but but i just think
bands started going straight to carliff which was a shame because all carliff venues are terrible
you know like newport center was was a leisure center but it was a really good venue you know
had good acoustics it had a kind of a good vibe um even though it was you know um uh so you know
black great down there and things like that if you turned up early enough you could get chips after
you swim and then go watch a band exactly the famous chips before the band i took my knees
to see robbie williams and they were i think they were eight and nine so i just left them
went and sat in the caff and ate chips i didn't want to see robbie williams i'm going to sit in
the cafe and eat chips that's exactly what the leisure center experience should be like really
isn't it you just like leave leave the kids to go and do whatever they're going to do see robbie
williams or take karate lessons or whatever it is it's all much of a muchness really and you just
sit there and eat chips and read the paper i don't know what was in there cheap ketchup because i hate
cheap ketchup except the cheap ketchup they had in newport center which was delicious
another another iconic element of newport in those days with ketchup in the leisure center
the ketchup in the leisure center
i can ask you i'm gonna ask you some questions and just kind of like respond
quick fire if you can what is it you like or love about newport sam i've got you first well why do
you stay here so long you came here you can you know honestly i love that it's not cardiff or
bristol and i love that it's i have no disrespect to cardiff and bristol no no they're great cities
they've got a lot more going for them than we have but they also have people that are so full of
themselves because they're from cardiff or bristol and they look down on everybody that isn't from a
major city and you don't get that in newport you know people from newport they know they know their
town's a shithole but it's their shithole and they're not going to look down on anybody else
they're going to welcome you into their shithole because they could do with some more people in
it to improve it a little bit you know it's a it's a really welcoming place where people just don't
they don't seem to there's pride in where you come from but it doesn't translate into
belittling people that aren't from there i think it's small enough newport and newport is a city i
suppose but it's so so small it's more of a big town really it's kind of small and i can't get
lost in cardiff cardiff sprawls you know like like gary i left a long time ago but i still
i do feel my heart belongs to newport i definitely think newport has always been much cooler than
cardiff in every kind of cultural cutting edge way it has you know richard king said that to me
actually cardiff is is just uncool man newport is always to me it's always been the people you know
the people like i don't that's not like a big sort of nebulous oh the people the people are so
wonderful it's just a great sort of you know it's just a great social movement and that's that's
not what i mean i mean like the individual people that all of the friends i've made over the years
the conversations i've had like sam that you know the nights i've had in your gaffes and the
the piss ups we've had and the conversations we've had you know are really dear to me in it
and so are all the conversations i've had with complete strangers at bars there are people who i
i hold really dear to my heart that i have never ever seen in my life without a drink in their hand
and and you know these all these people are really important to me and and i'm my my next book my
next novel i'm working on is is most likely going to be about newport in the mid-north east funnily
enough since you asked me to talk about this decade specifically and it's been really interesting
going back and visiting those you know mainly a lot of the loudest characters rather than you know
the quiet sensible people but going back and visiting those characters and sort of
i mean the book is years away from from being anything but but you know finally just going
back and thinking about the people that i spent time with and i think i think i think also being
away from newport as i have them for four years now i mean i come my family's still there so i
you know come back every week but having the distance from it now is something that's given
me the opportunity to think about writing about it properly you know not be not being out in the
pubs or in the nightlife or i'm also you know in my 40s now and one of the reasons i moved i mean
there were many reasons i moved to korea but one of them was that i thought getting away from newport
would sort of help me figure out what i thought about the place figure out my relationship and
sort of help me process you know the sort of 25 years i spent um out you know sat at the bar
and when i sort of decided that i wasn't going to be doing that quite so much i mean i got a family
now and stuff and um when i realized i wasn't going to be really living that life anymore i
i wanted to write about it and that's kind of where i'm headed at the moment but thinking about
those characters and the people that i've that are my friends the people that i've even people
that aren't my friends who are just people that were always people i saw um going back and sort
of thinking about it and writing notes and sketches and characters and things like that
it's it was just a just is and was a phenomenal place full of i know it can be a cliche you know
characters you know the characters that you meet in the merger for instance and we can all
name probably 20 different ones although there'd be a venn diagram there where blakey would exist
in almost all of those venn diagrams no doubt but um for many different reasons but um but just all
those people and all the things those people brought to the table the different cultural
musical influences you know you you go to the pub on a on a wednesday thursday friday and you'd
come away with a new playlist and that's you know 25 years of drinking in there drinking in
drinking in newport and drinking in the merengier and never once did i not feel like i was learning
something or encountering something even though i was just for the most part sat in the same on
the same store it really does in a new port i think really has uh great characters it's always
had great characters you know freak show yeah exactly some kind of strange carnival um but
also you know the point of writing a book like that is that you want to sort of capture some
kind of essence which is what i suppose we an element of what we've been talking about tonight
but capture some kind of essence of what a place feels like and what the people they sort of create
how about you san how do you think newport has changed since you've been here how do you hope it
has changed since you've been here how do you hope it has changed since you've been here how do you
i don't know i i think there's there's been a lot of it's really difficult to try and articulate but
i think newport is severely lacking in support from arts council wales and other organizations
of that ilk in that we have the riverfront but it's not used and it's just staffed by people who
understand the arts and yet are somehow running an arts center and that is one of my biggest
bug bears and i think when that theater was built there was this great like there was this great
feeling of okay they're they're going to build us a theater and we're going to be able to do the
most incredible things and have you know the most incredible acts coming to our theater and you end
up with a panto and a couple of comedians every year because and i mean speaking personally i
struggled for four years to get any form of support from arts council wales because i mean
they want to romanticize the past of me but when it comes to future funding you have to fight tooth
and nail whereas it seems if you're in cardiff or rexham or swansea and those are the only three
cities in wales i really have any experience of working in it seems if you're in one of those
three cities then they want to do things with you they want to work with you they want to you know
they want to help bring in the future whereas in newport i don't know what the issue is but it
needs looking into because we have the infrastructure we have you know the pubs a great venue the
morrange is still there the riverfront's a great venue we're getting a new leisure center
but without the support of arts council wales and the offices involved and other funders other arts
funders they're just going to sit empty for another 20 years and i think the big difference to me is
that the buildings are there now but there's still not the support that needed to be put in place
what breaks my heart is when i go to newport these days is seeing the death of the high street you
know i think that's probably a national problem but yeah but it seems to it's not really we're
not in cardiff yet and but i mean it is a national problem but the newport seems to have been hit
hardest i think i think it's it's a national problem but it's it's not hitting the massive cities
so your bristol's your swansies your manchesters but if you go to wakefield wakefield up you know
small city next to leeds exactly the same wrexham exactly the same it's i mean to me as well i don't
know why we're continuing to push for retail why we're trying to keep this retail in newport dream
alive because everyone is shopping online let's turn it into coffee shops flats you know pubs
clubs venues and make it a social hub so that people can all still come into the town but not
to shop anymore to socialize and access culture let's build more galleries let's build more museums
let's build more music venues because people aren't shopping so why the hell do we keep
trying to force people to open shops that nobody wants to shop in it's just of the waste of that
this the massive buildings that are in newport center now are a waste let's let's let's access
them culturally and then that way we can enrich every single person in newport's life because if
the city center was to become this incredible like free access arts point like i remember the
project space that we had that was the old sports shop that was incredible you could just wander in
and there was somebody had put something on the walls at some point we put some gigs on a couple
people put some photography exhibitions on we need more of that i mean i guess how do you
know how street is that you can keep you got to keep money circulating you know you got to bring
money into charge charge them for it people would pay to access culture if it was cheap enough
so but how do you think about newport how has it changed though sam for you in over the years is it
i don't know i think structurally it's changed but in terms of emotionally and and the support that
the arts and the culture aspect get it hasn't changed at all they've built a lot of big buildings
but there's still no support there would be the sum up the summation of what you know what i'm
trying to say there's nothing there for us we're still on our own as as in the pub we're still on
our own trying to trying to put the gigs on and the pandemic obviously has smacked hit the
shit out of you up i guess i mean the pandemic funding from welsh government was incredible
absolutely i cannot fault them for grassroots music venues it was phenomenal we actually came out with
a pandemic in a financially similar situation but with the recording studio in the basement and new
floors that we had been funded during the lockdown you know so it's it was quite good for us we
didn't you know at no point were we at risk of losing the venue because the welsh funding was so
great okay but just gonna over to gary ask him similar how do you think newport's changed and
um well i i wouldn't feel comfortable commenting on on what it's like now because i don't go out
and you know i visit family but i don't go into town very much although i have you know i it's
only been four years since you left no yeah i know and actually when i when i do go back when i when
i you know do drive down the road and go back there i've been into town it's nice to see that
you know there's that that it that newport isn't existing in kind of this isolated you know sort of
bubble and they're at you know like in other places they're really nice little coffee shops
cropping up and and um you know little eateries and things like that and and that's that's always
nice to see but i but i agree with sam i mean my experience is that newport you know new buildings
cropping up and things like that but but what newport is to me is not like buildings or anything
like that it's about attitudes and and the people and and newport kind of newport does quite well
for it's you know maybe not financially but does quite well for itself as the forgotten underdog
you know newport newport sort of grinds along that's what it does and that that's one of the
big attractions of it to me is like you know i mean i might not be easily identifiable anymore
as so so much as you know now i work in the arts and all that kind of stuff and
rather than signing on and getting pissed like i did in my teens and 20s now i you know i have
made quite a decent living for some you know in quite an i have quite an interesting job so
um but at the same time i do kind of feel that um i'm everything i am is because of my
newport upbringing and my newport you know formative years of teens and 20s yeah it's
absolutely made me who i am and um and everything i've achieved in my career i suppose is about um
just like putting your head down and getting on with it and working hard and like you know going
back to what sam said i mean you know the the pub's going to exist and bands are going to come
there and people are going to be creative and regardless of whether the arts council or
welsh government pays any attention and that's what newport and wales arts review was built
despite everybody you know books council arts council um you know wealth writers you know of
the of the generation up um all saying that like you know there's no space for what for what you're
doing there and 10 years later we're read by 250 000 people in 200 countries and it's and that's
because that the people who set up was actually from newport and i'm i'm absolutely convinced of
that and we just decided we're going to do this because it's what we want to do and we're going
to work hard at it and it's going to be brilliant and we're going to do it in spite of the naysayers
and the and being ignored by the people with the purse strings even though we do get public funding
but we had we i know that we had to fight 10 times harder than you know any magazine in
aberystwyth or bangor or cardiff for that matter um to get to get what we deserve i think i think
what gary says there in spite that's that's the important thing there is people in newport are
doing it in spite of the public funding that's available not because of it yeah it's a new port
it's a you know it's it is a new port attitude and i don't mean to be tribal about it but
living in calif as i do i'm really happy here we're all happy here but i do feel like i live
abroad you know i i don't feel like i'm living foreign country i do i absolutely do and and i
and i absolutely feel that way you know whether i'm walking down cabridge road and it's full of
you know middle working class voices and working class shops or whether i'm walking up to a bar
in pont canna and everybody sort of bbc middle class and welsh language and crackac and all that
you know i no matter where i am i feel like i'm visiting um and when it's interesting what you
just said actually because it reminded me of when i was young and and and the doll's first started
out because actually nobody gave a shit about any of the bands in south wales and you know once you
start to create a little scene and it's got value they start they start they start becoming
interested so it's actually about the whales out if you just make something that's good
and ignore everybody and they will eventually take notice yeah yeah young people are going to
be creative basically you know they're going to make music they're going to write they're going
to make art and and for the sake of it as well you know like we didn't we never set up the review to
make money it was because we wanted to um to write about stuff we wanted to be heard yeah
we wanted to have a voice and you know we'd all been to other places in wales and sent our stuff
in and there was no way in so set up your own thing and i think that obviously not exclusively
but there's a certain newport attitude to that is just like get it done and get it done now just do it
one of the things i was going to say which ties into something say i was saying earlier about um
how you know the noughties became slowly became the time in newport i felt that people just started
looking back on the 90s and that's an excellent point yeah but also it started to apologize
something yeah something that just was a kind of exciting time that's what i think that's when it
when it kind of happened but also something that i was only thinking about since i was thinking
about um coming and doing this podcast was um you know i used to dj um in the noughties in the
basement stuff like that i mean i you know i dj'd a little bit i was part of like four
team a four guy team of dj's and i was definitely fourth of the i'd prefer to be like out on the
floor i mean first best dj in newport but but one of the one of the things i was i was thinking
about was how um the kind of attitudes towards music i think in general may be changed in the
in the noughties um i was just kind of thinking about it and how it was kind of in in in the like
those last days of the big of the mega clubs which are all gone now apart from like in london
and manchester and stuff but those big mega clubs that are all closed now and clubs like the basement
which you know had like a 500 600 capacity or whatever it was and we used to dj it there and i
and i'm thinking back on it like how uh there was a kind of snobbery about music which i saw change
through that decade whereas which had kind of sort of two things about it like like you know
buying the sort of 2006 2007 you could fill a dance floor playing whitney houston in an indie
club whereas there's no way you could have got away with doing that 10 years earlier but at the
same time like you weren't going to get any interest from playing you know like joseph k or
the bush tetras whereas you could have done that in 98 99 they were people who like you know had
their special edition rough trade stuff they knew those bands and people didn't you know you just
get people looking at you weird if you put anything like that on in so so there was kind of a flip
thing of like it was really cool that you could get away with playing just great pop music that
everybody loved and you didn't have to be ashamed of like i want to dance with somebody there's a
great floor filler you could actually play it in a dj set and nobody would be like throwing beer cans
at you um but at the same time there was a kind of loss of depth i think when it came to club music
like you know nobody was like oh my god you i can't believe you played that jam b-side
you know it was like it had to be the hits you know but um so i think the noughties was
tying in with that thing about it becoming an age of nostalgia it also kind of swapped a sort of
maybe musical snobbery gradually for something that was a bit more inclusive and then became like
eventually becomes like all you're playing is kook's naive and fucking kings of leon
and everything dies but but there was a moment there where you could play fiery furnaces and
whitney houston there was a moment there was a window and it was pure joy yeah um that's
something we still do on saturdays we we can literally flip and it's brilliant you can flip
from lizzo to jerry cinnamon to whitney houston to andrew wk to something else super cool a niche
and then back into paramour and as long as you chuck in some my chemical romance at the end
everyone's going home happy it's it's a saturdays are a very strange night in the club it's
it's called bangers and it doesn't matter what the genre is if it's a banger it gets played
i think that's to do with uh the death of try do you know have you heard of a writer called
barney hoskins anybody has a music writer that is before your time a big big writer the enemy
back in the day and i i got him in once to do a guest lecture for me and uh he's really
really smart barney and he kind of explained really well what he thought was like the death of
we call it the death of culture but he said culture now is just you know
they just have it you know it's just like there it is just big you know you know you know but
it's like like guy was saying he used to be some niche culture it's so much cultural capital
maybe i'm going at my own arse here but i just thought you know we don't need we can't kind of
relax and just become you know part of the white noise you have to have to have a voice you have
to kind of develop something interesting
you